i18n: placeholders (#9114)
GoogleChrome/lighthouse: lighthouse-core/lib/i18n/README.md

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        /**
         * @description Error message explaining ...
         * @example {errorCode} NO_SPEEDLINE_FRAMES
         */
        didntCollectScreenshots: `Chrome didn't .... ({errorCode})`,
    };
    ```

*   Complex replacement

    When more complex numerical ICU replacement is needed the syntax is mostly the same as direct replacement. This is often used when replcaing times, or percentages.

    Note: these complex ICU formats are automatically given example values based on their ICU format as specified in `collect-strings.js`.  Therefore a normal description string can be used.

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        /** Description of display value. */
        displayValueText: 'Interactive at {timeInMs, number, seconds} s',
    };
    ```

TODO(exterkamp): explain all the comments and where they go/what they become.

TODO(exterkamp): explain why we can't use some ICU like number formatting.

TODO(exterkamp): example of plural and ordinal.

### The pipeline

The translation pipeline has 2 distinct stages, the collection and translation is done at build time, and the replacement is done at runtime.

> #### Translation Pipeline (build time)

Reviewer: I have a proposal for establishing some names that should simplify things.

1. **"Lighthouse Locale Format"** (LHL) is a thing. It's the ICU-friendly format that is used to author `UIStrings` and is seen in the locale files in `i18n/locales/*.json`
1. Adopt the term **"CTC format"** to refer to the json format that's currently known as "pre-locale", "messages.json", and "chrome_app". We need one easy name that mostly communicates its the format that Google TC (translation console) consumes. (CTC could mean _Chrome Translation Console_, but it doesn't need to.. it's just a distinct name). 
1. Name any files in CTC format as **`*.ctc.json`**. (These remain .gitignore'd)
1. `yarn i18n` (renamed from i18n:collect-strings) does these things:
   1. collect strings from core
   1. collect strings from stack packs
   1. writes `en-US.ctc.json` to disk to prepare for the TC import
   1. bakes en-US & en-XL and writes their locale files (enabling instant XL feedback)
1. The `export-tc-dump-to-github.sh` that we use on the google-side runs a `bake-ctc-to-lhl.js` script that lives in the LH repo, and writes/updates the `i18n/locales/*.json` files. No extra npm script run needed.

So the overall user flows look like this:

* LH contributor makes any changes to strings. They run `yarn i18n`
  * They can now use the en-XL locale to verify things work as intended.
* Googler is ready to kick off the TC pipeline again. 
  * They run `yarn i18n` and then on the google-side: `import-source-from-github.sh`, submit CL. Wait ~two weeks..
  * They run `export-tc-dump-to-github.sh`, and opens a LH PR.

Reviewer: And now.. MY ASCII MASTERPIECE.

```
 Source files:                                         Locale files:
+---------------------------+                         +----------------------------------------------
|                           ++                        | lighthouse-core/lib/i18n/locales/en-US.json |
| const UIStrings = { ... };|-+                 +---> | lighthouse-core/lib/i18n/locales/en-XL.json |
|                           |-|                 |     +----------------------------------------------+
+-----------------------------|                 |     |                                             ||
 +----------------------------|                 |     | lighthouse-core/lib/i18n/locales/*.json     |-<+
  +---------------------------+                 |     |                                             || |
                           |                    |     +----------------------------------------------| |
                           |                    |      +---------------------------------------------+ |
              $ yarn i18n  +--------------------+                                                      |
                           |                                                                           |
                           v                          ▐                       ▐    +---------------+   |
              +------------+------+                   ▐   Google TC Pipeline  ▐ +->|  *.ctc.json   |---+
              |  en-US.ctc.json   |  +--------------> ▐      (~2 weeks)       ▐    +---------------+
              +-------------------+  $ g3/import….sh  ▐                       ▐ $ g3/export….sh

```

Reviewer 2: You have no idea how excited I am that we will have a format called `CTC` 😍😃😍😃😍😃

In all seriousness, this sounds great to me 👍

Reviewer 3: Pure ASCII gold.

Author: Done!

    itself in [brackets] and then immediately include a link after it in
    (parenthesis). Note that `[link text] (https://...)` is NOT VALID because of
    the space and will not be converted to a link.

    Example usage:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
      description: 'The value of ... [Learn More](https://google.com/)',
    };
    ```

### ICU Replacement Syntax

ICU syntax is used throughout Lighthouse strings, and they are specified
directly in UIStrings. They follow 1 of 3 flavors.

*   Direct replacement

    This is simply a direct replacement of text into a string. Often used for
    Proper Nouns, code, or other text that is dynamic and added at runtime, but
    requires no additional formatting.

    Example usage:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        didntCollectScreenshots: `Chrome didn't .... ({errorCode})`,
    };
    ```

    ICU replacements can also use a JSDoc type syntax to specify an example for
    direct ICU replacements.

    *   To specify the description, use

        `@description <description>`

    *   To specify an example for an ICU replacement, use

>         `@example {<ICU variable name>} <example for ICU replacement>`

Reviewer 2: this feels a tad backwards IMO since we do `@param {<type>} <variable name>` and concrete example is basically the type but 🤷‍♂ 

was this order borrowed from somewhere?

Reviewer 4: yeah, I think I agree with @patrickhulce on the order. It's a little confusing since you're right that the variable in the message is also surrounded by braces, but doing it the other way matches the way `@param` works, and this is kind of like a @param.

Otherwise we could think of different formatting so it's not similar looking but opposite working.

```javascript
displayValue: `{itemCount, plural,
  =1 {1 link found}
  other {# links found}
  }`,
```

### Primitive Formatting

This include number formatting like `{timeInMs, number, milliseconds}` and
string replacements like `{some_name}`.

## message.json Syntax

### Why we use message.json

It is the
[Chrome Standard](https://developer.chrome.com/extensions/i18n-messages) for
i18n messages.

### Parts of a message.json message

(From the Chrome Docs)

```json
{
  "name": {
    "message": "Message text, with optional placeholders.",
    "description": "Translator-aimed description of the message.",
    "placeholders": {
      "placeholder_name": {
        "content": "A string to be placed within the message.",
        "example": "Translator-aimed example of the placeholder string."
      },
    }
  }
}
```

## Our message system

We use UIStrings & i18n.js to extract strings from individual js files into
locale.json files. This allows us to keep strings close to the code in which
they are used so that developers can easily understand their context. It also
comes with its own syntax.

UIStrings are defined in a simple Object with properties defining the strings.

> *   simple string named "title", with no description:

Author: We do not.  This has been identified as a follow up along with multi-line descriptions

> *   simple string named "title", with no description:

Reviewer 4: >> I think we always require a description, right? Or we should?

> We do not. This has been identified as a follow up along with multi-line descriptions

can you add it to this PR? It should be trivial (just check string length isn't 0 coming out of `computeDescription`) and AFAIK requires no fixes in any `UIStrings` because we've been informally following this rule and already have descriptions for everything.

> *   simple string named "title", with no description:

Author: Done :smile: :+1:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
      title: 'Minify CSS',
    };
    ```

*   simple string, with a description above property as a comment:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {

>       /** Imperative title of a Lighthouse audit that ... */

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I agree that it keeps things simple. Usage side, just description is far more common than description + example. The far simpler case IMO is when there's no `@example` business to deal with and it's just the description. That one is actually very straightforward to follow. 😆 

Maybe I'm misunderstanding?

      title: 'Minify CSS',
    };
    ```

### Markdown

Strings can also contain some limited markdown, that will be rendered in the
report.

*   Code block.

>     To format some text as code it should be contained in `backticks`. These

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    To format some text as code it should be contained in `backticks`. Any text within the backticks will not be translated.
```

Reviewer 4: this is a convenient way to do this, but are we sure we want to limit ourselves from ever translating text inside backticks? Or is there still a way to do that with replacements somehow

Author: Good point, I think for now it's okay because its used for very short things, but in future, maybe.  I don't know why code _would_ be translated, but :man_shrugging:

    should be used whenever code is non-translatable. Such as HTML tags or
    snippets of code. Also note that there is no escape character for using
    backticks as part of the string, so ONLY use backticks to define code
    blocks.

    Example usage:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
      title: 'Document has a `<title>` element',
    };
    ```

*   Link.

    To convert a section of text into a link to another URL, enclose the text
    itself in [brackets] and then immediately include a link after it in

>     (parenthesis). Note that `[link text] (https://...)` is NOT VALID because of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    (parentheses). Note that `[link text] (https://...)` is NOT VALID because of
```

    the space and will not be converted to a link.

    Example usage:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
      description: 'The value of ... [Learn More](https://google.com/)',
    };
    ```

### ICU Replacement Syntax

ICU syntax is used throughout Lighthouse strings, and they are specified

> directly in UIStrings. They follow 1 of 3 flavors.

Reviewer 4: this lists only two flavors, though?

*   Direct replacement

    This is simply a direct replacement of text into a string. Often used for

>     Proper Nouns, code, or other text that is dynamic and added at runtime, but

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    proper nouns, code, or other text that is dynamic and added at runtime, but
```

    requires no additional formatting.

    Example usage:

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        didntCollectScreenshots: `Chrome didn't .... ({errorCode})`,

>     };

Reviewer 4: maybe remove this example usage...it's a little confusing without the jsdoc since that'll be required to actually use the example.

(could just do the string and not the surrounding object if you really want the example here instead of making the reader keep going)

    ```

    ICU replacements must use a JSDoc type syntax to specify an example for
    direct ICU replacements.

    *   To specify the description, use

        `@description <description>`

    *   To specify an example for an ICU replacement, use

        `@example {<ICU variable name>} <example for ICU replacement>`

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        /**
         * @description Error message explaining ...
         * @example {errorCode} NO_SPEEDLINE_FRAMES
         */
        didntCollectScreenshots: `Chrome didn't .... ({errorCode})`,
    };
    ```

*   Complex replacement

    When more complex numerical ICU replacement is needed the syntax is mostly
    the same as direct replacement. This is often used when replcaing times, or

>     percentages.

Reviewer 4: maybe explain that the numbers are formatted, that's what makes it complex? Or could we even call it "formatted replacement" instead of complex?

Author: Done in the ICU section above.

    Note: these complex ICU formats are automatically given example values based
    on their ICU format as specified in `collect-strings.js`.  Therefore a normal 

>     description string can be used.

Reviewer 4: example should have a (short, example) description string

    ```javascript
    const UIStrings = {
        displayValueText: 'Interactive at {timeInMs, number, seconds} s',
    };
    ```

TODO(exterkamp): explain all the comments and where they go/what they become.

> TODO(exterkamp): explain why we can't use some ICU like number formatting.

Reviewer 4: maybe also TODO: example using plural

### The pipeline

The translation pipeline has 2 distinct stages, the collection and translation

> is done pre-compile time, and the replacement is done at runtime.

Reviewer 4: not sure what "pre-compile" time means in this context. Is "build time" sufficient to describe it?

#### Translation Pipeline (pre-compile)

1.  `file_with_UIStrings.js` this is where strings start. Optimized for
    programmer ease of use and not for machine parsing. Uses ICU syntax and
    markdown control characters inline.

2.  `yarn i18n:collect-strings` collects all UIStrings, and generates the

>     pre-locales. Does some parsing to make sure that common mistakes are

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    pre-locale files. Does some parsing to make sure that common mistakes are
```

    avoided.

3.  `pre-locale/en-US.json` this is the well formatted _machine parsable_
    fileset that is uploaded to be translated, i.e. they use $placeholder$

>     syntax instead of ICU. These will never be used by the internal i18n system,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    syntax instead of ICU. These aren't used by Lighthouse's i18n system,
```

    they are solely used to send to translators.

> 

Reviewer 4: maybe add a step about sending to translators and getting back `pre-locale` files for all languages? Otherwise isn't clear in the next step where they came from

4.  `yarn i18n:correct-strings` collects all pre-locales (or returned .json
    files of all languages if you're a Googler importing strings) and converts
    them back to Lighthouse json format and puts them into `locales/`.

5.  `locales/{locale}.json` the Lighthouse json files. Used by the i18n.js

>     system to i18n strings. Uses ICU and not $placeholder$ syntax. Optimized for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    system to localize strings. Uses ICU and not $placeholder$ syntax. Optimized for
```

>     i18n machine use.

Reviewer 4: not sure what this means :)

Author: Lol :robot:

> This pipeline is best seen with its component yarn commands:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This pipeline is best seen with its component commands:
```

```shell

> # collect UIStrings into pre-locales

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# collect UIStrings into pre-locale files
```

$ yarn i18n:collect-strings

# make the final en-US and en-XL files
$ yarn i18n:correct-strings

# Send off to translators, and the i18n:correct-strings again
# once those .json's are done.
$ sh google_import_script_that_calls_correct_strings
```

#### String Replacement Pipeline (runtime)

1.  String called in `.js` file, converted to i18n id.

2.  i18n id in lookup table along with backup message.

3.  Message is looked up via `replaceIcuMessageInstanceIds` &

>     `_formatIcuMessage`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    `getFormatted`.
```
since `_formatIcuMessage` is really the internal call

##### Example:

1.  string in `file_with_UIStrings.js`

    ```javascript
    // Declare UIStrings
    const UIStrings = {

>       /** Description of a Lighthouse audit that tells the user ...*/

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      /** @description Description of a Lighthouse audit that tells the user ...*/
```

Author: This isn't required or suggested yet, so leaving for the follow-up.

>       description: 'Minifying CSS files can reduce network payload sizes. ' +

Reviewer 4: it might be less confusing to use `title` for the example since `description` vs `description` gets a little confusing :)

Author: Swapped to `message`

        '[Learn more](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/minify-css).',
    };

>     // i18n init

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // Init the strings in this file with the i18n system.
```
or something

    const str_ = i18n.createMessageInstanceIdFn(__filename, UIStrings);

    // String called with i18n
    // Will become id like "lighthouse-core/audits/byte-efficiency/unminified-css.js | description"
    let description = str_(UIStrings.description);
    ```

> 2.  i18n lookup map registered the string (i18n.js)

Reviewer 4: not sure if we need to mention this

Author: It was super confusing to me where all this was used, so I included it.  Like where in runtime the map comes from and is populated, and how the lookup from LHR id -> map id works.  So I included it.

    ```javascript
    const _icuMessageInstanceMap = new Map();

    // example value in _icuMessageInstanceMap
    'lighthouse-core/audits/byte-efficiency/unminified-css.js | description': {
      icuMessageId: 'lighthouse-core/audits/byte-efficiency/unminified-css.js | description'
      icuMessage: 'Minifying CSS files can reduce network payload sizes. ' +
        '[Learn more](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/minify-css).'
    }
    ```

> 3.  Lookup in `i18n.js`. `_formatIcuMessage` will attempt to lookup in this

Reviewer 4: `replaceIcuMessageInstanceIds` and `getFormatted`, not `_formatIcuMessage`

> `{timeInMs, number, milliseconds}` is called _Complex ICU_ since the replacement is for numbers and other complex replacements that use the custom formatters in Lighthouse. The supported complex ICU formats are: `milliseconds`, `seconds`, `bytes`, `percent`, and `extendedPercent`.

Reviewer 4: `@example` example above here will also need to be updated

  }`,
```

> Note: Why are direct ICU and complex ICU placeholdered out, but Ordinals are not?  Direct and complex ICU should not contain elements that need to be translated (Direct ICU replaces universal proper nouns, and Complex ICU replaces number formatting), while ordinals do need to be translated.  Ordinals and selects are therefore handled specially, and do not need to be placeholdered out.

Author: - "ICU direct replacement"
- "ICU custom formatted replacement"
- "ICU complex replacement"
?

> Note: Why are direct ICU and complex ICU placeholdered out, but Ordinals are not?  Direct and complex ICU should not contain elements that need to be translated (Direct ICU replaces universal proper nouns, and Complex ICU replaces number formatting), while ordinals do need to be translated.  Ordinals and selects are therefore handled specially, and do not need to be placeholdered out.

Reviewer 4: do "ICU custom-formatted replacement" and I'm sold :)

> Note: Why are direct ICU and complex ICU placeholdered out, but Ordinals are not?  Direct and complex ICU should not contain elements that need to be translated (Direct ICU replaces universal proper nouns, and Complex ICU replaces number formatting), while ordinals do need to be translated.  Ordinals and selects are therefore handled specially, and do not need to be placeholdered out.

Author: Done!
